24 June 2004Cabinet yesterday (23 June 2004) welcomed the successful meeting of the International Investment Council (IIC) held over the past weekend. It noted the observations of IIC members regarding the socio-economic progress made by our country since the Council was formed in 2000, their confidence in the current policies and their appreciation of the concrete programme to take SA onto a higher growth and development path. Government will continue to harness the capacities of relevant organs, including the International Marketing Council, SA Tourism and Trade and Investment SA (TISA) to improve the efforts of all sectors of our society in marketing our country abroad. Government welcomes the re-affirmation by the recent G8 Summit of the commitment of developed countries to implement the Africa Action Plan, in line with NEPAD. Important commitments in this regard include: assistance to the African Peacekeeping Force, expediting the WTO negotiations on international trade, and support for the NEPAD Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Programme, infrastructure projects and the Global HIV Vaccine Enterprise. Critically, these commitments will be taken forward in more intense engagement between the NEPAD Steering Committee and the Committee of Personal Representatives of the heads of state and government that are members of the G8. The following Bills were approved for submission to Parliament: Cabinet reiterated South Africa s offer to host the Pan-African Parliament, and government will continue to work through structures of the African Union to ensure that this objective is attained when the decision is taken at the AU Summit in July. In order to strengthen these efforts and to prepare for the next sitting of PAP in SA in September 2004, an Inter-Ministerial Committee has been set up. Among other tasks, this Committee will examine the detailed logistical and other concrete issues, some of which will constitute part of the country s Bid Document for submission to AU member countries. The meeting concurred with following appointments: Cabinet formally extended the condolences of government to Rev Frank Chikane, Cabinet Secretary and DG in The Presidency, and his family, on the loss of his mother, as well as to the family of Minister of Defence, Mosioua Lekota whose grandmother has passed on. Government also reiterates its condolences and sympathy to the family of former editor of the Sowetan and community leader, Aggrey Klaaste. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top