4 August 2004Cabinet today agreed on a broad framework to underpin Monitoring and Evaluation of policy development and implementation across all spheres of government. This is aimed at developing a comprehensive system that will help in facilitating speedier implementation of government programmes. A Task Team made up of various "co-ordinating Departments" (The Presidency, National Treasury, DPSA and DPLG) has been set up to review current systems across all spheres and to bring recommendations to Cabinet at the beginning of 2005. The meeting noted the progress in monitoring and evaluation of the current programme of government as decided upon in the May Cabinet lekgotla and articulated in the President's State of the Nation Address. The process of reporting to Cabinet has started and the programme will be updated on the website once the current reporting cycle has been completed. Cabinet has adopted a detailed programme to take the implementation of the Batho Pele campaign to a higher and more effective level. This includes: an intensified campaign to inform citizens of their rights so that they are able to call public servants to account; that civil servants who interact directly with the public should wear name-tags; incorporation of Batho Pele in the Key Performance Agreements of public servants including senior managers; and a Service Delivery Watch system which will include unannounced inspections by Ministers and managers at government offices servicing the public. The following Bills were approved for submission to Parliament: The Consumer Credit Bill was adopted for public comment. As part of the campaign against all manifestations of corruption in our society, Cabinet has decided that consultations will be held with partners in the private sector and civil society to convene the Second National Anti-Corruption Summit towards the end of 2004. The objectives of the Summit will include an assessment of strategies, achievements as well as challenges in dealing with this scourge. It is intended that the Summit would emerge with a joint programme of action based on experiences gained since the last Summit in 1999. The meeting approved a programme to conduct a comprehensive National Audit of Cultural Property and Heritage Collections. This will help improve the protection of the nation's cultural property and to curb illicit trafficking in such property. The meeting approved the appointment of Deputy Directors-General in National Treasury (2), and one each in the Departments of Social Development and Home Affairs. Cabinet noted reports in connection with the arrest of South African citizens and/or individuals with SA travel documents allegedly involved in terrorist activity. Government wishes to reiterate its principled rejection of any acts of terrorism and its commitment to work with international agencies and other states in eradicating this scourge. This is an issue of national interest, both in terms of our citizens' security and global peace and stability. Our government has the wherewithal to deal with the challenge of terrorism in our own country and in co-operation with other governments in Africa and further afield. We also wish to call on South Africans to avoid involvement with individuals or groups engaged in any form of criminal activity. On media reports pertaining to South Africa being targeted for acts of terrorism by the individuals arrested in Pakistan, government wishes to express its outrage at the manner in which these matters have been aired, without any credible substantiation from security agencies in our country and in Pakistan. We call on the media to exercise restraint in dealing with these matters, by ensuring that reports on these issues are based on fact, and do not lead to unwarranted alarm among the public. Cabinet formally expressed its condolences to the family of Wilton Mkwayi, who passed away a fortnight ago and was accorded a Special Official Funeral. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top