3 March 2004Cabinet today approved, or concurred with, the following appointments: Cabinet was briefed on the Luthuli Legacy Project and the national unveiling activities which will be held on 20 and 21 March at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, KwaDukuza and Groutville, with the participation of the President and Deputy President. The project includes the Luthuli House and New Building, Luthuli Exhibition and Documentary, a public sculpture and portrait bust and the renovation and restoration of the church in his area. The meeting noted and welcomed progress in the implementation of the Plan on Comprehensive Care, Management and Treatment of HIV and AIDS. Among other facts, the briefing on the implementation of the Plan indicated that: The meeting received a comprehensive briefing on programmes to address crimes against women and children. It was agreed that the various structures dealing with this matter such as the Inter-departmental Management Team and Intersectoral Child Justice Steering Committee would be co-ordinated and, where necessary, convened by The Presidency to ensure greater synergy. It was also agreed that the programme would be broadened to include the elderly and persons with disability. Further, government will improve social work counselling especially for vulnerable groups. Cabinet was informed of the request for, and concurred with, the participation of the Minister of Finance in the United Kingdom (UK) government's Commission on Africa, which will deal with such matters as the contribution of the UK and other developed countries in the implementation of New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). On the recent events in Haiti, Government wishes to reiterate its serious concern at the manner in which President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was forced to resign, and the danger that criminal gangsters and groups previously involved in gross human rights violations could install themselves as government, thus reversing the nascent democratic process in that country. Cabinet noted that the South African government was in consultation with CARICOM and the African Union (AU) to make whatever contribution may be necessary to ensure that stability, democracy and legitimacy are restored in Haiti. As indicated in the past few days, the issue of asylum for President Aristide in South Africa has not arisen, since no formal application for such sanctuary has been received. If and when such an issue arose, South Africa would approach it in consultation with the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the AU and the United Nations (UN), taking into account our own laws and our country's interests. Cabinet was informed that Minister Penuell Maduna was recovering well, following the vehicle accident in which he was recently involved, and it wished him a speedy recovery. Enquiries Joel Netshitenzhe Cell: 082 900 0083 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top